
PART A
1.
A.DDL commands(data defination language)
  1.Create- to create the table or database.
  2.Alter- to change the data in table.
  3.DROP- use to drop the table but not delete the table from the database.
  4.TRUNCATE- used to delete the rows but  the table structure remains the same.
  5.RENAME- used to remane the table.

B.DML(DATA MANIPULATION LANGUAGE)
  1.INSERT- used to insert the values to the table.
  2.DELETE-used to delete the table or data in the rows.
  3.UPDATE-used to modify the existing data in the table.
  4.WHERE- used to filter specific location of data as a condition.

C.DQL(DATA QUERY LANGUAGE0
   SELECT-is used to view the table.

D.DCL(DATACONTROL LANGUAGE)
  1.GRANT- used to give permission to access the database or table.
  2.REVOKE- used to remove the permission to access the database or table.

E.TCL(TRANSCATION CONTROL LANGUAGE)
  1.COMMIT- is used to make the data as a permanent which cant modify again. 
  2.ROLLBACK- is used to do UNDO if it is not commited.
  3.SAVEPOINT- is used to set a point with data,so that you can rollback when ever you want.

2.

DDL commands(data defination language)
MAINLY FOR TABLE RELATIVE COMMANDS

  1.Create- to create the table or database.
  2.Alter- to change the data in table.
  3.DROP- use to drop the table but not delete the table from the database.
  4.TRUNCATE- used to delete the rows but  the table structure remains the same.
  5.RENAME- used to remane the table.
example: 
to create table

create table assessment.employee(
empid integer primary key,
empname varchar(50),
department varchar(30),
salary integer);

table is created.


DML(DATA MANIPULATION LANGUAGE)-MAINLY FOR ROW BASED COMMANDS
  1.INSERT- used to insert the values to the table.
  2.DELETE-used to delete the table or data in the rows.
  3.UPDATE-used to modify the existing data in the table.
  4.WHERE- used to filter specific location of data as a condition.

example: to insert the values in the table
 insert into assessment.employee(empid, empname,department,salary)
values (101,'john','IT',45000),
(102,'mary','HR',35000),
(103,'david','finance',55000),
(104,'sam','IT',40000),
(105,'priya','HR',38000);
values are inserted

3.
DQL(DATA QUERY LANGUAGE)
   SELECT-is used to view the table.
select * from assessment.employee;

4.
DELETE-is a DML command
      -used to delete the selected data in the rows.
      -we can rollback before commited.
      -structure remains the same
TRUNCATE- is a DDL command.
      - used to delete all the rows.
      - sturcture remains same.
      -where command we cant use here.
DROP-   is a DDL command.
      - is used to remove entire table or database.
      - table structure willbe deleted

5.
COMMIT- is a TCL command. which is used to make the data changes permanently. we cant revert back
syntax- commit;
example: update assessment.account
         set balance=35000 where accountno=1002;
         commit;

6.
COMMIT- is a TCL command. which is used to make the data changes permanently. we cant revert back
syntax- commit;

example: we have the account table which we want to update the balance 35000 where account number is 1002 and the changes should be permanently
in future no one can change that data.
 
update assessment.account
         set balance=35000 where accountno=1002;
         commit;

ROLLBACK- is a TCL command,where we can revert the changes of current transactions but should be commit for that data.
if it is given commit command we cant revert the changes.
syntax: ROLLBACK;
example: a librarian by mistakely deleted the one of the book details. we should revert the changes.

          delete from assessment.book
          where bookid=3;

          rollback ; 

7.SAVEPOINT- is a TCL command which is used to set a point within the transaction, 
so that we can rollback to that specific point instead of undoing the entrie transaction.

syntax:SAVEPOINT savepoint_name;

8.
both are DCL(DATACONTROL LANGUAGE)
  1.GRANT- used to give permission to access the database or table.
syntax:GRANT privilage_name
       ON databasename table_name
       TO 'username'@'host';
  2.REVOKE- used to remove the permission to access the database or table.
syntax:
             REVOKE privilage_name
       ON databasename table_name
       TO 'username'@'host';

9. Asterisk(*) represents the all the rows and colomns of the table, which shows the all the data in the table
 syntax: select * from tablename;
example: display all the data of student table.
         select * from  student;


10. NO, SELECT statement cant modify the data, because select is only used to view the data in the table.
   example:select * from  student;

11.
Selecting all the colomn: it will show all the colomn details from the table by using '*'.
 example:select * from  student;

selecting sepecific coloumn : it will show particular colomn whichever we want from the table.
example: SELECT stuid,fees from STUDENT; iy displays oly stuid  and fees of the student.

12. It throws error by mentioning unknown coloum in table.

13. FROM clause is used in every SELECT command bze, select command can extract the exact data from particular mentioned table.

14, syntax error,missing letter in tablename or missing commas.

15.


PART B

1. select * from employee;

2. select empname from employee;

3. select department from employee;

4. select empname, salary from employee;

5. select empname, department,city from employee;

6. Select * from employee
   where department='HR';
7.select empname,salary from employee;

8. Select empname, cities from employee;

9.select salary from employee;

10. select empid,empname,department from employee;

11.create table Student(
   studentid integer,
   studentname varchar(20),
   course varchar(20));

12. alter table student
    add emailid varchar(50);


13. insert into student(studentid, studentname, course, emailid),
    values(108,'Raj','Testing','raj@gmail.com');

14. insert into student(studentid, studentname, course, emailid),
    values(108,'Raj','Testing','raj@gmail.com');
   commit;

15. select empid,empname,department from employee;



