


                                      INDEXING Interview Questions

-- 1. What is an Index in SQL?

An Index is a database object that improves the speed of data retrieval by creating a separate structure that stores column values along with pointers to the actual rows in a table.

Think of it like the index in a book—instead of reading every page, you use the index to quickly find the required topic.

Interview Answer:

An Index is a database object that improves query performance by allowing SQL to find rows quickly without scanning the entire table.

-- 2. Why is an Index used?

Indexes are used to improve the performance of SELECT queries.

Benefits
Faster data retrieval
Reduces search time
Improves JOIN performance
Improves sorting (ORDER BY)
Improves filtering (WHERE)
Improves grouping (GROUP BY)

Example:

Without Index:

SELECT * FROM Employee
WHERE Emp_ID = 101;

SQL checks every row.

With Index:

SQL directly jumps to the required row.

Interview Answer:

Indexes are used to speed up data retrieval and improve the performance of SELECT, JOIN, WHERE, ORDER BY, and GROUP BY operations.

-- 3. What is a Full Table Scan?

A Full Table Scan occurs when SQL reads every row in a table to find the required data.

Example:

SELECT *
FROM Employee
WHERE Department = 'HR';

If no index exists on Department, SQL scans every row.

Interview Answer:

A Full Table Scan means the database reads every row of a table because it cannot use an index to locate the required data.

-- 4. What is an Index Scan?

An Index Scan occurs when the database uses an index to search for data instead of scanning the entire table.

Example:

CREATE INDEX idx_department
ON Employee(Department);

Now,

SELECT *
FROM Employee
WHERE Department = 'HR';

uses the index.

Interview Answer:

An Index Scan means the database uses an index to locate matching rows, which is usually faster than a full table scan.

-- 5. What are the different types of indexes?

Common SQL indexes include:

Primary Index (created for a Primary Key)
Clustered Index
Non-Clustered Index
Unique Index
Composite (Multi-column) Index
Full-Text Index
Spatial Index (for geographic data)

Interview Answer:

The common types of indexes are Clustered, Non-Clustered, Unique, Composite, Full-Text, and Spatial indexes. A Primary Key also creates an index automatically in many databases.

-- 6. What is the difference between Clustered and Non-Clustered Index?
Clustered Index	                               Non-Clustered Index
Sorts the actual table data       	Separate structure from the table
Only one per table	                Multiple allowed per table
Faster for range queries        	Faster for specific lookups
Table rows are stored in index order	Contains pointers to table rows

Interview Answer:

A Clustered Index determines the physical order of data in a table, whereas a Non-Clustered Index stores index entries separately with pointers to the actual data.

-- 7. What is a Composite Index?

A Composite Index is an index created on multiple columns.

Example:

CREATE INDEX idx_emp
ON Employee(Department, Salary);

Useful for queries like:

SELECT *
FROM Employee
WHERE Department = 'HR'
AND Salary > 50000;

Interview Answer:

A Composite Index is an index on two or more columns and is useful for queries that filter or sort using those columns together.

-- 8. What is a Unique Index?

A Unique Index ensures that all values in the indexed column are unique.

Example:

CREATE UNIQUE INDEX idx_email
ON Employee(Email);

Duplicate emails are not allowed.

Interview Answer:

A Unique Index prevents duplicate values in the indexed column while also improving query performance.

-- 9. What are the advantages and disadvantages of indexing?

Advantages
Faster SELECT queries
Faster JOIN operations
Faster sorting and grouping
Reduces full table scans

Disadvantages
Uses extra storage space
Slows INSERT operations
Slows UPDATE operations
Slows DELETE operations
Requires maintenance

Interview Answer:

Indexes improve read performance but increase storage usage and can slow down INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE operations because the indexes must also be updated.

-- 10. Can multiple indexes be created on the same table?

Yes.

Example:

CREATE INDEX idx_name
ON Employee(Emp_Name);

CREATE INDEX idx_salary
ON Employee(Salary);

CREATE INDEX idx_dept_salary
ON Employee(Department, Salary);

Interview Answer:

Yes. A table can have multiple indexes on different columns or combinations of columns.

-- 11. What happens if too many indexes are created?

Problems include:

Increased storage usage
Slower INSERT operations
Slower UPDATE operations
Slower DELETE operations
Higher index maintenance overhead
The optimizer has more indexes to evaluate, which may not improve performance

Interview Answer:

Creating too many indexes can waste storage and reduce the performance of data modification operations because every index must be maintained.

-- 12. When should you create an index?

Create indexes on columns that:

Are frequently used in WHERE clauses
Are used in JOIN conditions
Are used in ORDER BY
Are used in GROUP BY
Have high selectivity (many distinct values)
Are searched frequently

Interview Answer:

Create indexes on columns that are frequently searched, joined, sorted, or grouped to improve query performance.

-- 13. When should you avoid creating an index?

Avoid indexes on:

Small tables
Columns that change frequently
Columns with very few distinct values (e.g., Gender with only 'M' and 'F')
Tables with many INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE operations
Columns rarely used in queries

Interview Answer:

Avoid indexes on small tables, low-selectivity columns, frequently updated columns, or columns rarely used in searches.

-- 14. How do indexes affect INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE operations?

Whenever data changes, the database must update the corresponding indexes.

INSERT
Adds the new row.
Updates all relevant indexes.
UPDATE
If an indexed column changes, the index must be updated.
DELETE
Removes the row.
Removes related index entries.

Interview Answer:

Indexes speed up data retrieval but slow down INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE operations because the database must keep the indexes synchronized with the table data.

-- 15. Which index is created automatically on a PRIMARY KEY in MySQL InnoDB?

In MySQL InnoDB, the PRIMARY KEY automatically creates a Clustered Index.

If no PRIMARY KEY is defined, InnoDB attempts to use a suitable unique, non-null index. If none exists, it creates a hidden row ID.

Interview Answer:

In MySQL InnoDB, a PRIMARY KEY automatically creates a Clustered Index, and the table data is stored in the order of the primary key.